README.md, before:

# react-movable

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/react-movable.svg?style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-movable)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/react-movable.svg?style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-movable)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/tajo/react-movable.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/tajo/react-movable)
[![size](https://img.shields.io/bundlephobia/minzip/react-movable.svg?style=flat)](https://bundlephobia.com/result?p=react-movable)

![Basic list](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tajo/react-movable/master/assets/react-movable.gif?raw=true)

[![Edit Basic react-movable](https://codesandbox.io/static/img/play-codesandbox.svg)](https://codesandbox.io/s/k1mrwyr9l3)

[See all the other examples](https://react-movable.netlify.com) and [their source code](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/tree/master/examples)!

## Installation

```
yarn add react-movable
```

## Usage

```jsx
import * as React from 'react';
import { List, arrayMove } from 'react-movable';

class SuperSimple extends React.Component {
  state = {
    items: ['Item 1', 'Item 2', 'Item 3', 'Item 4', 'Item 5', 'Item 6']
  };
  render() {
    return (
      <List
        values={this.state.items}
        onChange={({ oldIndex, newIndex }) =>
          this.setState(prevState => ({
            items: arrayMove(prevState.items, oldIndex, newIndex)
          }))
        }
        renderList={({ children, props }) => <ul {...props}>{children}</ul>}
        renderItem={({ value, props }) => <li {...props}>{value}</li>}
      />
    );
  }
}
```

## Features

- **Vertical drag and drop for your lists and tables**
- No wrapping divs or additional markup
- Simple single component, no providers or HoCs
- Unopinionated styling, great for **CSS in JS** too
- **Accessible**, made for keyboards and screen readers
- **Touchable**, works on mobile devices
- Full control over the dragged item, it's a portaled React component
- **Autoscrolling** when dragging (both for containers and the window)
- Scrolling with the mousewheel / trackpad when dragging
- Works with semantic table rows too
- **Smooth animations**, can be disabled
- Varying heights of items supported
- Optional lock of the horizontal axis when dragging
- Typescript and Flow type definitions
- **No dependencies, less than 4kB (gzipped)**
- Coverage by [e2e puppeteer tests](#end-to-end-testing)

## Keyboard support

- `tab` and `shift+tab` to focus items
- `space` to lift or drop the item
- `j` or `arrow down` to move the lifted item down
- `k` or `arrow up` to move the lifted item up
- `escape` to cancel the lift and return the item to its initial position

## `<List />` props

### renderList

```ts
renderList: (props: {
  children: React.ReactNode;
  isDragged: boolean;
  props: {
    ref: React.RefObject<any>;
  };
}) => React.ReactNode;
```

`renderList` prop to define your list (root) element. **Your function gets three parameters and should return a React component**:

- `props` containing `ref` - this needs to be spread over the root list element, note that items need to be direct children of the DOM element that's being set with this `ref`
- `children` - the content of the list
- `isDragged` - `true` if any item is being dragged

### renderItem

```ts
renderItem: (params: {
  value: Value;
  index?: number;
  isDragged: boolean;
  isSelected: boolean;
  isOutOfBounds: boolean;
  props: {
    key?: number;
    tabIndex?: number;
    'aria-roledescription'?: string;
    onKeyDown?: (e: React.KeyboardEvent) => void;
    onWheel?: (e: React.WheelEvent) => void;
    style?: React.CSSProperties;
    ref?: React.RefObject<any>;
  };
}) => React.ReactNode;
```

`renderItem` prop to define your item element. **Your function gets 5 parameters and should return a React component**:

- `value` - an item of the array you passed into the `values` prop
- `index` - the item index (order)
- `isDragged` - `true` if the item is dragged, great for styling purposes
- `isSelected` - `true` if the item is lifted with the `space`
- `isOutOfBounds` - `true` if the item is dragged far left or right
- `props` - it has multiple props that you need to spread over your item element

### values

```ts
values: Value[]
```

An array of values. The value can be a string or any more complex object. The length of the `values` array equals the number of rendered items.

### onChange

```ts
onChange: (meta: { oldIndex: number; newIndex: number, targetRect: ClientRect }) => void
```

Called when the item is dropped to a new location:

- `oldIndex` - the initial position of the element (0 indexed)
- `newIndex` - the new position of the element (0 indexed), -1 when `removableByMove` is set and item dropped out of bounds
- `targetRect` - [getBoundingClientRect](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/getBoundingClientRect) of dropped item

The List component is `stateless` and `controlled` so you need to implement this function to change the order of input `values`. Check the initial example.

### beforeDrag

```ts
beforeDrag?: (params: { elements: Element[]; index: number }) => void;
```

Called when a valid drag is initiated. It provides a direct access to all list DOM elements and the index of dragged item. This can be useful when you need to do some upfront measurements like when building a [table with variable column widths](https://react-movable.netlify.com/?selectedKind=List&selectedStory=Table%20Auto%20Cell%20Widths).

### removableByMove

```ts
removableByMove: boolean;
```

Default is `false`. When set to `true` and an item is dragged far left or far right (out of bounds), the original gap disappears (animated) and following item drop will cause `onChange` being called with `newIndex = -1`. You can use that to remove the item from your `values` state. [Example](https://react-movable.netlify.com/?selectedKind=List&selectedStory=Removable%20by%20move).

### transitionDuration

```ts
transitionDuration: number;
```

The duration of CSS transitions. By default it's **300ms**. You can set it to 0 to disable all animations.

### lockVertically

```ts
lockVertically: boolean;
```

If `true`, the dragged element can move only vertically when being dragged.

### voiceover

```ts
voiceover: {
  item: (position: number) => string;
  lifted: (position: number) => string;
  dropped: (from: number, to: number) => string;
  moved: (position: number, up: boolean) => string;
  canceled: (position: number) => string;
}
```

In order to support screen reader users, `react-movable` is triggering different messages when user is interacting with the list. There is already a set of [English messages](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/src/List.tsx#L77-L89) included but you can override it with this prop.

## `arrayMove` and `arrayRemove`

There are also additional two helper functions being exported:

```ts
arrayMove: <T>(array: T[], from: number, to: number) => T[];
arrayRemove: <T>(array: T[], index: number) => T[];
```

They are useful when you need to manipulate the state of `values` when `onChange` is triggered.

## Motivation

There are two main ways how you can implement drag and drop today:

- **[HTML5 drag and drop API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API)**. However, it has some [severe limitations](https://www.quirksmode.org/blog/archives/2009/09/the_html5_drag.html).
- Mouse and touch events. It's very low level. You have the full control but it has no concept of DnD.

There are multiple great libraries in React's ecosystem already. DnD can get pretty complicated so each one of them covers different use-cases and has different goals:

[react-dnd](https://github.com/react-dnd/react-dnd) is a general purpose DnD library that makes amazing job abstracting quirky HTML5 API. It provides well thought out lower-level DnD primitives and let you build anything you want.

[react-beautiful-dnd](https://github.com/atlassian/react-beautiful-dnd) is a really beautiful DnD library for lists. It comes with a great support for accessibility and it's packed with awesome features. It doesn't use HTML5 API so it doesn't impose any of its limitations.

[react-sortable-hoc](https://github.com/clauderic/react-sortable-hoc) provides a set of higher order components to make your lists dnd-able. It has many features and approaches similar to `react-beautiful-dnd` but it's more minimalistic and lacks some features as accessibility or unopinionated styling.

So why `react-movable` was created? There are two main goals:

- **Small footprint**. It's about 10 times smaller than `react-dnd` or `react-beautiful-dnd` (~3kB vs ~30kB) and half of the size of `react-sortable-hoc` (~7kB). That's especially important when you intend to use `react-movable` as a dependency in your own library. However, that also means that some features are left out - for example, the horizontal DnD is not supported.
- **Simple but not compromised**. - Every byte counts but not if it comes down to the support for accessibility, screen readers, keyboards and touch devices. The goal is to support a limited set of use cases but without compromises.

### Features that are not supported (and never will be)

- Horizontal sorting.
- DnD between multiple list.
- Combining items / multi drag support.
- Supporting older versions of React. The minimum required version is `16.3` since the new `createRef` and `createPortal` APIs are used.

If you need the features above, please give a try to `react-beautiful-dnd`. It's a really well-designed library with all those features and gives you a lot of power to customize! If you are building an application heavy on DnD interactions, it might be your best bet! `react-movable`'s goal is not to be feature complete with `react-beautiful-dnd`.

### Planned features

- Built-in virtualization / windowing.

Other feature requests will be thoroughly vetted. Again, the primary goal is to keep the size down while supporting main use-cases!

## End to end testing

**This library is tightly coupled to many DOM APIs**. It would be very hard to write unit tests that would not involve a lot of mocking. Or we could re-architect the library to better abstract all DOM interfaces but that would mean more code and bigger footprint.

Instead of that, `react-movable` is thoroughly tested by end to end tests powered by [puppeteer](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/puppeteer). It tests all user interactions:

- [drag and drop](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/basic.test.ts) of items by mouse (same and different heights)
- [keyboard controls](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/basic.a11y.test.ts) (moving items around)
- [auto scrolling for containers](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/scrolling.container.test.ts)
- [auto scrolling for the window](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/scrolling.window.test.ts)
- [visual regression testing](https://github.com/americanexpress/jest-image-snapshot)

All tests are automatically ran in Travis CI with headless chromium. This way, the public API is well tested, including pixel-perfect positioning. Also, the tests are pretty fast, reliable and very descriptive.

Do you want to run them in the `dev` mode (slows down operations, opens the browser)?

```bash
yarn storybook #start the storybook server
yarn test:e2e:dev #run the e2e tests
```

`CI` mode (storybook started on the background, quick, headless)

```bash
yarn test:e2e
```

## Browser support

- **Chrome** (latest, mac, windows, iOS, Android)
- **Firefox** (latest, mac, windows)
- **Safari** (latest, mac, iOS)
- **Edge** (latest, windows)
- **MSIE 11** (windows)

## Users

- [Uber Base UI](https://baseui.design/components/dnd-list/)

> If you are using react-movable, please open a PR and add yourself to this list!

## Contributing

This is how you can spin up the dev environment:

```
git clone https://github.com/tajo/react-movable
cd react-movable
yarn
yarn storybook
```

## Shoutouts 🙏

The popular React DnD libraries were already mentioned in the motivation part. Big shoutout to `react-beautiful-dnd` ❤️ ️ for supporting multiple great features and adding first-class support for accesibility! It was strongly used as an inspiration for `react-movable`!

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tajo/react-movable/master/assets/browserstack-logo.png?raw=true" height="80" title="BrowserStack Logo" alt="BrowserStack Logo" />

Big thanks to [BrowserStack](https://www.browserstack.com) for letting the maintainers use their service to debug browser issues.

## Author

Vojtech Miksu 2019, [miksu.cz](https://miksu.cz), [@vmiksu](https://twitter.com/vmiksu)

Commit message:

Add example of a custom component in renderItem, and a clarification in the README

README.md, after:

# react-movable

[![npm version](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/react-movable.svg?style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-movable)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dm/react-movable.svg?style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-movable)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/tajo/react-movable.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/tajo/react-movable)
[![size](https://img.shields.io/bundlephobia/minzip/react-movable.svg?style=flat)](https://bundlephobia.com/result?p=react-movable)

![Basic list](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tajo/react-movable/master/assets/react-movable.gif?raw=true)

[![Edit Basic react-movable](https://codesandbox.io/static/img/play-codesandbox.svg)](https://codesandbox.io/s/k1mrwyr9l3)

[See all the other examples](https://react-movable.netlify.com) and [their source code](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/tree/master/examples)!

## Installation

```
yarn add react-movable
```

## Usage

```jsx
import * as React from 'react';
import { List, arrayMove } from 'react-movable';

class SuperSimple extends React.Component {
  state = {
    items: ['Item 1', 'Item 2', 'Item 3', 'Item 4', 'Item 5', 'Item 6']
  };
  render() {
    return (
      <List
        values={this.state.items}
        onChange={({ oldIndex, newIndex }) =>
          this.setState(prevState => ({
            items: arrayMove(prevState.items, oldIndex, newIndex)
          }))
        }
        renderList={({ children, props }) => <ul {...props}>{children}</ul>}
        renderItem={({ value, props }) => <li {...props}>{value}</li>}
      />
    );
  }
}
```

## Features

- **Vertical drag and drop for your lists and tables**
- No wrapping divs or additional markup
- Simple single component, no providers or HoCs
- Unopinionated styling, great for **CSS in JS** too
- **Accessible**, made for keyboards and screen readers
- **Touchable**, works on mobile devices
- Full control over the dragged item, it's a portaled React component
- **Autoscrolling** when dragging (both for containers and the window)
- Scrolling with the mousewheel / trackpad when dragging
- Works with semantic table rows too
- **Smooth animations**, can be disabled
- Varying heights of items supported
- Optional lock of the horizontal axis when dragging
- Typescript and Flow type definitions
- **No dependencies, less than 4kB (gzipped)**
- Coverage by [e2e puppeteer tests](#end-to-end-testing)

## Keyboard support

- `tab` and `shift+tab` to focus items
- `space` to lift or drop the item
- `j` or `arrow down` to move the lifted item down
- `k` or `arrow up` to move the lifted item up
- `escape` to cancel the lift and return the item to its initial position

## `<List />` props

### renderList

```ts
renderList: (props: {
  children: React.ReactNode;
  isDragged: boolean;
  props: {
    ref: React.RefObject<any>;
  };
}) => React.ReactNode;
```

`renderList` prop to define your list (root) element. **Your function gets three parameters and should return a React component**:

- `props` containing `ref` - this needs to be spread over the root list element, note that items need to be direct children of the DOM element that's being set with this `ref`
- `children` - the content of the list
- `isDragged` - `true` if any item is being dragged

### renderItem

```ts
renderItem: (params: {
  value: Value;
  index?: number;
  isDragged: boolean;
  isSelected: boolean;
  isOutOfBounds: boolean;
  props: {
    key?: number;
    tabIndex?: number;
    'aria-roledescription'?: string;
    onKeyDown?: (e: React.KeyboardEvent) => void;
    onWheel?: (e: React.WheelEvent) => void;
    style?: React.CSSProperties;
    ref?: React.RefObject<any>;
  };
}) => React.ReactNode;
```

`renderItem` prop to define your item element. **Your function gets 5 parameters and should return a React component**:

- `value` - an item of the array you passed into the `values` prop
- `index` - the item index (order)
- `isDragged` - `true` if the item is dragged, great for styling purposes
- `isSelected` - `true` if the item is lifted with the `space`
- `isOutOfBounds` - `true` if the item is dragged far left or right
- `props` - it has multiple props that you need to spread over your item element. Since one of these is `ref`, if you're spreading over a custom component, it must be wrapped in `React.forwardRef` like in the "Custom component" example.

### values

```ts
values: Value[]
```

An array of values. The value can be a string or any more complex object. The length of the `values` array equals the number of rendered items.

### onChange

```ts
onChange: (meta: { oldIndex: number; newIndex: number, targetRect: ClientRect }) => void
```

Called when the item is dropped to a new location:

- `oldIndex` - the initial position of the element (0 indexed)
- `newIndex` - the new position of the element (0 indexed), -1 when `removableByMove` is set and item dropped out of bounds
- `targetRect` - [getBoundingClientRect](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Element/getBoundingClientRect) of dropped item

The List component is `stateless` and `controlled` so you need to implement this function to change the order of input `values`. Check the initial example.

### beforeDrag

```ts
beforeDrag?: (params: { elements: Element[]; index: number }) => void;
```

Called when a valid drag is initiated. It provides a direct access to all list DOM elements and the index of dragged item. This can be useful when you need to do some upfront measurements like when building a [table with variable column widths](https://react-movable.netlify.com/?selectedKind=List&selectedStory=Table%20Auto%20Cell%20Widths).

### removableByMove

```ts
removableByMove: boolean;
```

Default is `false`. When set to `true` and an item is dragged far left or far right (out of bounds), the original gap disappears (animated) and following item drop will cause `onChange` being called with `newIndex = -1`. You can use that to remove the item from your `values` state. [Example](https://react-movable.netlify.com/?selectedKind=List&selectedStory=Removable%20by%20move).

### transitionDuration

```ts
transitionDuration: number;
```

The duration of CSS transitions. By default it's **300ms**. You can set it to 0 to disable all animations.

### lockVertically

```ts
lockVertically: boolean;
```

If `true`, the dragged element can move only vertically when being dragged.

### voiceover

```ts
voiceover: {
  item: (position: number) => string;
  lifted: (position: number) => string;
  dropped: (from: number, to: number) => string;
  moved: (position: number, up: boolean) => string;
  canceled: (position: number) => string;
}
```

In order to support screen reader users, `react-movable` is triggering different messages when user is interacting with the list. There is already a set of [English messages](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/src/List.tsx#L77-L89) included but you can override it with this prop.

## `arrayMove` and `arrayRemove`

There are also additional two helper functions being exported:

```ts
arrayMove: <T>(array: T[], from: number, to: number) => T[];
arrayRemove: <T>(array: T[], index: number) => T[];
```

They are useful when you need to manipulate the state of `values` when `onChange` is triggered.

## Motivation

There are two main ways how you can implement drag and drop today:

- **[HTML5 drag and drop API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTML_Drag_and_Drop_API)**. However, it has some [severe limitations](https://www.quirksmode.org/blog/archives/2009/09/the_html5_drag.html).
- Mouse and touch events. It's very low level. You have the full control but it has no concept of DnD.

There are multiple great libraries in React's ecosystem already. DnD can get pretty complicated so each one of them covers different use-cases and has different goals:

[react-dnd](https://github.com/react-dnd/react-dnd) is a general purpose DnD library that makes amazing job abstracting quirky HTML5 API. It provides well thought out lower-level DnD primitives and let you build anything you want.

[react-beautiful-dnd](https://github.com/atlassian/react-beautiful-dnd) is a really beautiful DnD library for lists. It comes with a great support for accessibility and it's packed with awesome features. It doesn't use HTML5 API so it doesn't impose any of its limitations.

[react-sortable-hoc](https://github.com/clauderic/react-sortable-hoc) provides a set of higher order components to make your lists dnd-able. It has many features and approaches similar to `react-beautiful-dnd` but it's more minimalistic and lacks some features as accessibility or unopinionated styling.

So why `react-movable` was created? There are two main goals:

- **Small footprint**. It's about 10 times smaller than `react-dnd` or `react-beautiful-dnd` (~3kB vs ~30kB) and half of the size of `react-sortable-hoc` (~7kB). That's especially important when you intend to use `react-movable` as a dependency in your own library. However, that also means that some features are left out - for example, the horizontal DnD is not supported.
- **Simple but not compromised**. - Every byte counts but not if it comes down to the support for accessibility, screen readers, keyboards and touch devices. The goal is to support a limited set of use cases but without compromises.

### Features that are not supported (and never will be)

- Horizontal sorting.
- DnD between multiple list.
- Combining items / multi drag support.
- Supporting older versions of React. The minimum required version is `16.3` since the new `createRef` and `createPortal` APIs are used.

If you need the features above, please give a try to `react-beautiful-dnd`. It's a really well-designed library with all those features and gives you a lot of power to customize! If you are building an application heavy on DnD interactions, it might be your best bet! `react-movable`'s goal is not to be feature complete with `react-beautiful-dnd`.

### Planned features

- Built-in virtualization / windowing.

Other feature requests will be thoroughly vetted. Again, the primary goal is to keep the size down while supporting main use-cases!

## End to end testing

**This library is tightly coupled to many DOM APIs**. It would be very hard to write unit tests that would not involve a lot of mocking. Or we could re-architect the library to better abstract all DOM interfaces but that would mean more code and bigger footprint.

Instead of that, `react-movable` is thoroughly tested by end to end tests powered by [puppeteer](https://github.com/GoogleChrome/puppeteer). It tests all user interactions:

- [drag and drop](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/basic.test.ts) of items by mouse (same and different heights)
- [keyboard controls](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/basic.a11y.test.ts) (moving items around)
- [auto scrolling for containers](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/scrolling.container.test.ts)
- [auto scrolling for the window](https://github.com/tajo/react-movable/blob/master/e2e/scrolling.window.test.ts)
- [visual regression testing](https://github.com/americanexpress/jest-image-snapshot)

All tests are automatically ran in Travis CI with headless chromium. This way, the public API is well tested, including pixel-perfect positioning. Also, the tests are pretty fast, reliable and very descriptive.

Do you want to run them in the `dev` mode (slows down operations, opens the browser)?

```bash
yarn storybook #start the storybook server
yarn test:e2e:dev #run the e2e tests
```

`CI` mode (storybook started on the background, quick, headless)

```bash
yarn test:e2e
```

## Browser support

- **Chrome** (latest, mac, windows, iOS, Android)
- **Firefox** (latest, mac, windows)
- **Safari** (latest, mac, iOS)
- **Edge** (latest, windows)
- **MSIE 11** (windows)

## Users

- [Uber Base UI](https://baseui.design/components/dnd-list/)

> If you are using react-movable, please open a PR and add yourself to this list!

## Contributing

This is how you can spin up the dev environment:

```
git clone https://github.com/tajo/react-movable
cd react-movable
yarn
yarn storybook
```

## Shoutouts 🙏

The popular React DnD libraries were already mentioned in the motivation part. Big shoutout to `react-beautiful-dnd` ❤️ ️ for supporting multiple great features and adding first-class support for accesibility! It was strongly used as an inspiration for `react-movable`!

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tajo/react-movable/master/assets/browserstack-logo.png?raw=true" height="80" title="BrowserStack Logo" alt="BrowserStack Logo" />

Big thanks to [BrowserStack](https://www.browserstack.com) for letting the maintainers use their service to debug browser issues.

## Author

Vojtech Miksu 2019, [miksu.cz](https://miksu.cz), [@vmiksu](https://twitter.com/vmiksu)
